Exploring things (#9)
bcgov/ds-intro-to-python: course-content/31_exploring_data_structures.qmd

---
title: Exploring Data Structures
teaching: 45
author: Stuart Hemerling
exercises: 4
objectives:
  - to be able to understand and use some basic tools to manipulate dataframes
  - to be able to understand and use tools to create a subset of data based on logical filtering
  - to reinforce use of basic summarizing methods with the data
keypoints: null
jupyter: python3
---

> # Part 3.1 Exploring and Understanding Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Exploring and Understanding Data
```
The title is the one that gets a single \# (which was included in the title at the top of the qmd. Every section below this should start with 2 #. Also markdown will do all the work numbering things, so you don't need to hardcode them into your section titles.

In the world of python, this usually means working with a library or package you have already been introduced to called pandas. It let's you do so much!

The first dataset we'll look at is one that looks at data for countries around the world and shows population levels as well as gdp per capita over a number of years. It is a great data set to look at. 

## 3.1.1. Getting the data and an overview

```{python}
#| output: false
import pandas as pd
url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bcgov/ds-intro-to-python/main/data/gapfinder.csv"
df = pd.read_csv(url)
```

It's usually a good idea right away to take a quick look at the data to make sure what we have read in makes sense. So let's do that using some pandas methods that we covered earlier.

> :::{.callout-remember}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{.callout-tip}
## Reminder: Naming variables!
```

To be consistent, I think we should stick to the tips callout everywhere, and possibly the Important (red) one if it's realllly important.

When you create a variable or object, you can name it pretty much whatever you want. But it is a best practice to name it something intuitive but not overly verbose. Also remember to not leave spaces in your names, and to always be consistent in the naming conventions you use (e.g. camelCase, underscore_case, etc.)

:::

```{python}
df.info()
```

So this data is looking good so far. We can see that we have created a pandas dataframe within our python environment. There are 1704 rows of data and 6 columns or variables. You can see there are only non-null values... so happily there is no missing data to worry about.

```{python}
df.head(2)
```

The `.head()` method let's us look at actual data like we would likely do in Excel. This dataset has some high level country metrics about population and the economy going back to 1952. 

> ## 3.1.2. Selecting columns (variables)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Selecting columns (variables)
```

Same as before, don't need hard coded section names. You might need to fix the number of # you want in each section though, I'm adding 1 to each level based on you having started at 1 instead of 2.

In the "real world" of data its not uncommon to see hundreds or thousands of columns, so knowing how to pare down our dataset so it is not overly bloated is important. Our dataset is just 6 columns wide, so not too big, but let's go ahead and narrow it down anyway.  

Let's create an object (in this case a dataframe) called "narrow_df" and then specify the names of columns that we want to have in our slimmed down dataset. We are primarily interested in population, but we want to have year, country, and continent in there too. After we create it let's take a look at the new dataframe:

```{python}
narrow_df = df[['country', 'year', 'pop', 'continent']]
narrow_df.head(2)
```

So now we have a more manageable dataset to work with called narrow_df. The original dataframe df is still there, and still the same size as before it we want to have a look though. 

> :::{.callout-important}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{.callout-tip}
## Reminder on Assignment!
```

Adding a title to the callout.

When you create a variable or dataframe in python, to the left of the `=` sign you always put the name of the thing you want to make or modify. To the right, that's where you put the contents of what it is you want to create. It may feel counterintuitive! Especially if you are using the same variable or dataframe identifier on both sides of the equals sign.
:::

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

> ### Challenge 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Challenge 1
```

It looks like it doesn't matter, but the documentation uses two # here.

Let's say you just want to narrow down the dataset to include just the country and the GDP per capita. How would you do it? Don't forget to run your code so it also shows a view of the result so you can confirm the code worked as you wanted it to. 

:::

:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

### Solution to Challenge 1

First you would like to create a new object to hold this narrowed down version of the dataset, then just use some method like `.head()` to see some of the resulting data. 

> ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{python}
```

Use curly brackets here to display the output and actually run the code.

challenge1_df = df[['country', 'gdpPercap']]
challenge1_df.head(2)
```

:::

> 

Reviewer: I would also include something here (probably at the beginning of this section?) about the different ways to select a single column: 
`df['col_name']` vs `df.col_name`

Reviewer 2: The double `[[` might be confusing for some as well... Have they encountered lists before this point? If so, you could point out that `df[]` is used for indexing, and the list of columns inside the second `[` is the `list` of column names

Author: Good idea. I'll hard code these distinctions in there for easier reference. Will reinforce the notion of multiple tools/approaches to achieve similar outcomes.

> ## 3.1.3. Selecting rows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Selecting Rows
```

Removing hardcoded section numbers.

> 

Reviewer: Do you prefer using the query method or just directly filtering on the df?

For example, instead of 
```python
df.query('year==1972')
```
I would usually write it as:
```python
df[df.year == 1972]
```

It seems less pythonic to me to have all the .methods hidden inside a string. But I could be missing a very valid reason for doing it this way!

Author: I have no strong preference, I suppose I opted for having the person see the method name in-line. Probably more important to be consistent through the tutorials though, so happy to remove it

> Of course, in data analysis we are usually interested in looking at just some of rows of data, not all of it all the time. So when we want to look at just selected rows (i.e. values within a given column) there is a hand pandas function called `.query()` that we can leverage. It helps us with selecting the rows we want. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, in data analysis we are usually interested in looking at just some of rows of data, not all of it all the time. So when we want to look at just selected rows (i.e. values within a given column) there is a handy pandas function called `.query()` that we can leverage. It helps us with selecting the rows we want. 
```

Typo

We set up an expression in pandas  with `.query()` and it will evaluate it for us. For example, imagine we want to find just the rows where the year is 1972. Here's how we do that, using `==` instead of just `=`:

```{python}
filtered_df = df.query('year == 1972')
filtered_df.head(2)
```

We can even get more specific with string variables, looking for content by starting letter or letters.  For example, here's how we can look for specific countries: 

```{python}
filtered_df = df.query('country.str.startswith("C") & year == 1972')
filtered_df.head(3)
```

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

> ### Challenge 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Challenge 2
```

> 

Reviewer: Can get rid of a lot of the whitespace if you want. Just leave 1 between the ##Title and content.

> Your director has come to you and asked if you what the life expectancy was is in Canada in 2007.  How would you use pandas code to get the data you need? And after having run the code, what's the answer? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your director has come to you and asked if you know what the life expectancy was is in Canada in 2007.  How would you use pandas code to get the data you need? And after having run the code, what's the answer? 
```

Missing word.

:::

:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

### Solution to Challenge 2

First you would like to create a new object to hold this narrowed down version of the dataset, then just use some method like `.print()` or `.head()` to see some of the resulting data. 

> ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{python}
```

challenge2_df = df.query('country.str.startswith("Canada") & year == 1972')
print(challenge2_df)
```

:::

> :::{.callout-important}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{.callout-tip}
## .loc() and .iloc() to also filter rows! 
```

> There is something else you should know about row selection. It is VERY common within python/pandas to see the `.loc()` and `.iloc()` codes to identify rows by index location.   The index starts at 0 for the first row (yes, "0", and not "1")!  And you can also use this method You may not ever need to use it, but it is good to know what it means when you come across it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is something else you should know about row selection. It is VERY common within python/pandas to see the `.loc()` and `.iloc()` methods to identify rows by index location. The index starts at 0 for the first row (yes, "0", and not "1")!  You can also use these methods. You may not ever need to use it, but it is good to know what it means when you come across it. 
```

So there is actually a difference between `.loc()` and `.iloc()`. 
`.iloc()` does it by numerical index location (the 0-end we are used to) that you have explained here, whereas loc() does it by the named index location. You'll sometimes run across dataframes where the index numbers have been all screwed up (you've done a .sort_values() is a very common reason). loc() also allows you to grab the second index by column name instead of by index location. As a good rule of thumb you shouldn't use slicing in loc() as it only works in the very specific instance of the index still being integers. 

Another thing to point out is that in both cases, you can multi index here, so .loc calls would look like:
df.loc[ [list_of_index_names], [list_of_column_names] ]

Whereas a .iloc call would be more like:
df.iloc[ row:slice, column:slice]

I would be more careful in the explanation here!

:::

```{python}

> x_df = df.loc[0:1]

Reviewer: Don't use slicing with .loc()

print(x_df)
```

> ## 3.1.4. Sorting rows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sorting rows
```
Removing hard coded numbers and added a #

So now you've mastered how to select rows and columns you want, congratulations!

Instead of hunting and pecking for insights, one way to quickly make some sense of the data is to sort it - something you probably do in Excel all the time. 

> Above, we have created a dataframe with just the one country in it and for all years above 1972. So now let's sort the data by year, and then see what can spot any insights. To do this, we use the `.sort_values()` method.

Reviewer: It was actually filtered to only the year 1972. If you want all years, I would change the python code you mention above!

Let's go fetch and look at the filtered_df dataframe from above, and use this method to sort by year, going from more recent to less recent:

```{python}
filtered_df.sort_values('lifeExp', ascending=False)

> #

Reviewer: Were you meaning to include something here?

Author: yes i will clean this up

```

> Here we can read a few insights out of the data.

Reviewer: Worth mentioning that you can sort by more than column?

Author: Good idea. I will add.

> ## 3.1.5. Putting multiple methods together (chaining)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Putting multiple methods together (chaining)
```
Same as above.

You can also put multiple methods in the same line of code, as long as you separate each of the elements. In pandas, this is called "method chaining",  as you are kind of creating a chain of actions to take place. 

```{python}
#| scrolled: true
filtered_df = df.query('country.str.startswith("Ca") & year == 2007').sort_values('year', ascending = False)
filtered_df.head(3)
```

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

> 

Reviewer: Because this does scroll offscreen, I would include a second example showing how you can split up the query onto multiple lines using either () or \ as well.

Author: Good idea

> ### Challenge 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Challenge 3
```

> Your director has come back to you and wondered aloud whether the life expectancy of people changed during the 1970s in Cambodia. Use what you know about selecting rows and sorting data to get the data you need to answer the question. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your director has come back to you and wondered about whether the life expectancy of people changed during the 1970s in Cambodia. Use what you know about selecting rows and sorting data to get the data you need to answer the question. 
```

:::

:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

### Solution to Challenge 3

> Using the query() and sort.values() methods and by chaining them together. Looking at the data we see that in the 1970s there was a sharp decline in life expectancy in Cambodia. We also see, thankfully, that is has recovered strongly since then. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `query()` and `sort_values()` methods and chain them together. Looking at the data we see that in the 1970s there was a sharp decline in life expectancy in Cambodia. We also see, thankfully, that it has recovered strongly since then. 
```

> ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{python}
```

challenge3_df = df.query('country.str.startswith("Cambodia") & year < 2008').sort_values('year', ascending = False)
print(challenge3_df)
```

:::

> ## 3.1.6. Creating new columns of data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating new columns of data
```
Same as above

> 

Reviewer: Is it worth going over the other ways of making columns?
eg:
df['new_col'] = df['old_col']*7
df['new_col'] = df['old_col'].apply(lambda x: fun(x))
df['new_col'] = df.apply(lambda x: fun(x), axis=1)

Author: Good idea.

Author: I might just reference them in speaking and live code...

Reviewer: I think if it's going in the live code it would be a useful reference to include in here. Is assign your go-to-method as well? I'm much in the camp of the other 3 types, but should stick to what you're most comfortable with.

Author: Good point. I'll incorporate them on the page and they'll be there for easier reference and speaking to

Very often we have some data in our dataset that we want to transform to give us additional information.

In Excel this is something that is done all the time by creating a formula in a cell that refers to other columns and applies some sort of logic or mathematical expression to it. In pandas, one handy tool to use is the `.assign()` method. 

> Imagine we want to know what the actual GDP is for a given country for a given year and not just the GDP per capita. Can we do this? Let's take a look. It's with the help of an additional function called lambda. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine we want to know what the actual GDP is for a given country for a given year and not just the GDP per capita. Can we do this? Let's take a look. It's with the help of an additional special Python function called `lambda`. 
```

We create our own little function right inside of the code that allows us to create this column (or variable, or feature). The logic is:

(new_variable_name  = `lambda x: some expression involving x and math and/or other variables`)

The `.assign()` method looks at this expression and then returns the value it is asked to do. This is how it comes all together to give us actual GDP for each row in our dataframe:

```{python}
new_df = df.assign(gdp=lambda x: x['pop'] * x['gdpPercap'])
new_df = new_df.query('year == 2007').sort_values('gdp', ascending = False)
new_df.head(5)
```

So now we can see which countries had the biggest GDP in 2007. Notice that the gdp data is in scientific notation (i.e. the decimal number times x number of zeros), so it's a bit hard to read. If we wanted readers to consume that data we would go ahead and change the data type for it. But for current purposes we'll leave that alone.

> ## 3.1.7. Joining datasets together

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Joining datasets together
```
Same as above.

One of the most important tasks in data analysis is to be able to join multiple datasets together. There is a second file that we can get regarding country size in square kilometers.  Let's fetch that data and take a look. 

```{python}
url2 = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bcgov/ds-intro-to-python/main/data/countrysize.csv"

> df2 = pd.read_csv(url2, encoding= 'unicode_escape')

Reviewer: Seeing as we are including a section on properly naming things/pep8 conventions and whatnot, should we maybe use a more descriptive name for this second df? I think the first one being df is fine (as that's so commonly used), but here it might help.

Author: Makes sense, I'll come up with something else, probably "countrysize" or "other"

df2.info()
df2.sample(2)
```

Ok, this new dataset looks like we expect - a list of countries alongside the land size in square kilometers. 

> While pandas makes it possible to join two dataframes on their index, joining on a particular "key" column is also possible. Joining on a key column is likely more intuitive for those familiar with merging with vlookup in Excel or joining tables with SQL. So let's go ahead and join this based on the "country" column from the original dataset and "nation" from the second one. In database management language, we are going to to a left join (perhaps the most common type of join). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While pandas makes it possible to join two dataframes on their index, joining on a particular "key" column is also possible. Joining on a key column is likely more intuitive for those familiar with merging with vlookup in Excel or joining tables with SQL. So let's go ahead and join this based on the "country" column from the original dataset and "nation" from the second one. In database management language, we are going to do a left join (perhaps the most common type of join). 
```

> :::{.callout-important}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{.callout-tip}

To Merge or to Join?
```

> In pandas, there are two methods we can use to bring these datasets together, namely the `.merge()` and the `.join()` function. Both can accomplish many of the same tasks and you likely will come across both. But it probably makes sense to keep it simple and get familiar with one of them first, then move on to the next one later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In pandas, there are two methods we can use to bring these datasets together, namely the `.merge()` and the `.join()` functions. Both can accomplish many of the same tasks and you likely will come across both. `merge()` is a more generalized version of `join(),` and allows for more complicated combinations of data. To keep things simple, we will start with just the `join()` method here, but keep in mind that a lot of the functionality will carry over to `merge()`!
```

Adding more context.

:::

> In the example below we will use the `.join()` function. We will think of "df" as being the original dataset on the left, and df2 as the other dataset that we want to merge data from. We use for both the variable 'country' as the key to join on. We use an inline `.set_index()` function in order to preserve a nice looking index column on the left of the dataframe, based on the index of df. 

Reviewer: So this example is actually why I prefer using .merge() as it let's you use left_on and right_on. The `.set_index()` call isn't doing quite what you think it is (or say it is, anyways) - it's actually physically moving the 'nation' column to be the index of df2, and then it is left joining the country column from df to the index of df2. I would be more explicit about what is happening here.

Author: Thank you for explaining that. Maybe I'll rework with merge() to keep it more straightforward and explicated.

```{python}
join_df = df.join(df2.set_index('nation'), on='country')
join_df.head(2)
```

> Now you want to see all of the columns in this new dataset but just for the year 2007 and you want to see it organized by gdp per capita. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you want to see all of the columns in this new dataset but just for the year 2007 and you want to see it organized by GDP per capita. 
```

I think I've missed this in a few places, but GDP should probably be capitalized.

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

> ### Challenge 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Challenge 4
```

> Your director has come back, yet again, and wants to know what top five countries were in terms GDP per capita in 2007. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your director has come back, yet again, and wants to know what the top five countries were in terms of GDP per capita in 2007. 
```

:::

:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

> ### Solution to Challenge 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Solution to Challenge 4
```

Using the `.query()` method, you specfy that you want to return the values that are equivalent to the year of interest.  Then you can chain along the `.sort_values()` method 

> ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{python}
```

challenge4_df = join_df.query('year == 2007').sort_values('gdpPercap', ascending = False)
challenge4_df.head(5)
```

:::

> ```{python}

Reviewer: I would just remove this code section - think it was a leftover copy-paste.

challenge4_df = join_df.query('year == 2007').sort_values('gdpPercap', ascending = False)
challenge4_df.head(5)
```

> ## 3.1.8. Grouping 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Grouping 
```
Same as above.

> Sometimes of course you would prefer to group rows together for the purpose of summarizing them somehow. With our current dataset, we would like to  summarize it so that we can see the breakdown of the metrics for each year by country in alphabetical order. 

Reviewer: You aren't grouping by country here, so I would change this sentence.

We can accomplish this using the `.groupby()` method together with another mathematical function. 

```{python}
group_df = join_df.groupby(by=['year']).sum()
group_df.head(20)
```

> In the example above we see the sum of each of the metrics for all of the values in the respective year. So we see that world population grew from about 2.5 billion people in 1952 to over 6.25 billion in 2007. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above we see the sum of each of the metrics for all of the numerical columns in the respective year. So we see that world population grew from about 2.5 billion people in 1952 to over 6.25 billion in 2007. Luckily, the total land area of the world hasn't shrunk with all those extra people! 
```

> 

Reviewer: Groupby is one of the strongest things pandas can do. I would include some more examples here to cover:
 
* doing multiple aggregations at once via .agg() (different columns getting different aggregations applied, as well as maybe one column getting 2 aggregations, for example)
* giving more examples of statistical aggregations you can do (sum, mean, std, min, max, first, size, etc)
* doing multiple column groupbys 
* how to move the grouped columns back into the dataframe
* perhaps a challenge that requires multiple levels of aggregation (something easily done in R due to the way its grouping works, but slightly harder here - but doable with the multiindexing). Here's an example I just found: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/23377108/pandas-percentage-of-total-with-groupby

Author: some good ideas, i will look to expand some examples as you suggest. It is challenging to know how much content there is for the teaching and for the comprehending as we would like to have it, but in terms of sheer content that is worthwhile to cover, it makes sense

Author: I expanded the groupby section and made it more useful, also created a challenge that incorporated that as well, good ideas!  In the end I have the feeling that there is a lot of content now in this 3.1 tutuorial, and not sure if expanding it more will improve it, as I can imagine students being fairly exhausted by the end.

> ## 3.1.9. Summary 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Summary 
```
Same as above

:::

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

## Challenge 1

Let's say you just want to narrow down the dataset to include just the country and the GDP per capita. How would you do it? Don't forget to run your code so it also shows a view of the result so you can confirm the code worked as you wanted it to. 

:::

:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

### Solution to Challenge 1

First you would like to create a new object to hold this narrowed down version of the dataset, then just use some method like `.head()` to see some of the resulting data. 

```{python}
challenge1_df = df[['country', 'gdpPercap']]
challenge1_df.head(2)
```

:::

### Selecting Rows

Of course, in data analysis we are usually interested in looking at just some of rows of data, not all of it all the time. So when we want to look at just selected rows (i.e. values within a given column) there is a handy pandas function called `.query()` that we can leverage. It helps us with selecting the rows we want. 

> We set up an expression in pandas  with `.query()` and it will evaluate it for us. For example, imagine we want to find just the rows where the year is 1972. Here's how we do that, using `==` instead of just `=`:

Reviewer 2: The boolean `==` vs `=` for assignment can really trip people up... will probably need to spend a bit of time on this

Author: Good idea. Yes, I will explain the subtle difference and why/how it matters with code

:::

```{python}
df.info()
```

So this data is looking good so far. We can see that we have created a pandas dataframe within our python environment. There are 1704 rows of data and 6 columns or variables. You can see there are only non-null values... so happily there is no missing data to worry about.

```{python}
df.head(2)
```

The `.head()` method let's us look at actual data like we would likely do in Excel. This dataset has some high level country metrics about population and the economy going back to 1952. 

### Selecting columns (variables)

In the "real world" of data its not uncommon to see hundreds or thousands of columns, so knowing how to pare down our dataset so it is not overly bloated is important. Our dataset is just 6 columns wide, so not too big, but let's go ahead and narrow it down anyway.  

Let's create an object (in this case a dataframe) called "narrow_df" and then specify the names of columns that we want to have in our slimmed down dataset. We are primarily interested in population, but we want to have year, country, and continent in there too. After we create it let's take a look at the new dataframe:

```{python}

> narrow_df = df[['country', 'year', 'pop', 'continent']]

Reviewer 2: advantages of this way vs `.filter()`?

Reviewer: convention more than anything I would say

```{python}
filtered_df = df.query('year == 1972')
filtered_df.head(2)
```

We can even get more specific with string variables, looking for content by starting letter or letters.  For example, here's how we can look for specific countries: 

```{python}
filtered_df = df.query('country.str.startswith("C") & year == 1972')
filtered_df.head(3)
```

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

## Challenge 2

Your director has come to you and asked if you know what the life expectancy was is in Canada in 2007.  How would you use pandas code to get the data you need? And after having run the code, what's the answer? 

:::

:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

### Solution to Challenge 2

First you would like to create a new object to hold this narrowed down version of the dataset, then just use some method like `.print()` or `.head()` to see some of the resulting data. 

```{python}
challenge2_df = df.query('country.str.startswith("Canada") & year == 1972')
print(challenge2_df)
```

:::

:::{.callout-tip}
## .loc() and .iloc() to also filter rows! 

> There is something else you should know about row selection. It is VERY common within python/pandas to see the `.loc()` and `.iloc()` methods to identify rows by index location. The index starts at 0 for the first row (yes, "0", and not "1")!  You can also use these methods. You may not ever need to use it, but it is good to know what it means when you come across it. 

Reviewer 2: If you refer to `.iloc()` you should also have an example, and talk about when you would use each... otherwise I think you should only mention one.

---
title: Exploring Data Structures
teaching: 45
author: Stuart Hemerling
exercises: 4
objectives:
  - to be able to understand and use some basic tools to manipulate dataframes
  - to be able to understand and use tools to create a subset of data based on logical filtering
  - to reinforce use of basic summarizing methods with the data
keypoints: null
jupyter: python3
---

# Exploring and Understanding Data

Getting a high level summary of the data is important but data is particularly valuable when refined. Your analysis will start to come alive when we start to do some slicing and dicing and grouping of data or even creating additional variables. In an Excel world, this is like when you use filter options for columns, or create pivot tables, or when you create a formula in a new column to create a new variable. In data science parlance, this is the kind of thing that is referred to as `data wrangling` - getting the (already cleaned) data you want in the form you want it in. 

> In the world of python, this usually means working with a library or package you have already been introduced to called pandas. It let's you do so much!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the world of python, this usually means working with a library or package you have already been introduced to called pandas. It lets you do so much!
```

The first dataset we'll look at is one that looks at data for countries around the world and shows population levels as well as gdp per capita over a number of years. It is a great data set to look at. Let's import the pandas library and then use the `.read_csv()` function to get some population by country data. 

```{python}
import pandas as pd
url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bcgov/ds-intro-to-python/main/data/gapfinder.csv"

> df = pd.read_csv(url)

Reviewer 2: I would strongly suggest choosing a more informative name for this data frame. We have a section on naming things - I think we should add guidance to that section (choose informative names) and then do that here

Reviewer 2: See #15

Author: That's a fair point. My rationale was that one sees simply "df" so much in code that it becomes a way to introduce people to that reality, that convention. But I am happy to call it straightaway something that follows the rules that we introduce.

```

It's usually a good idea right away to take a quick look at the data to make sure what we have read in makes sense. The `.info()` method prints the number of columns, column labels, column data types, memory usage, range index, and the number of cells in each column (non-null values).

:::{.callout-tip}
## Reminder: Naming variables!
When you create a variable or object, you can name it pretty much whatever you want. You will see widespread use of the name "df". Apart from "df", it is considered good practice to name dataframes something that is at the same time intuitive but not overly verbose. Also remember to not leave spaces in your names, and to always be consistent in the naming conventions you use (e.g. camelCase, underscore_case, etc.)
:::

```{python}
df.info()
```

So this data is looking good so far. We can see that we have created a pandas dataframe within our python environment. There are 1704 rows of data and six columns or variables. You can see there are only non-null values... so happily there is no missing data to worry about.

> The `.head()` pandas method let’s us look at actual data as one does in Excel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `.head()` pandas method lets us look at actual data as one does in Excel.
```

In our example below, we will create a new dataframe called "narrow_df", and we are primarily interested in getting the population column from the original df, but we want to have year, country, and continent in our new dataframe also.

```{python}
narrow_df = df[['country', 'year', 'pop', 'continent']]
narrow_df.head(2)
```

So now we have a more manageable dataset to work with called "narrow_df". The original dataframe "df" is still there, and still the same shape as before, we have not changed it.

Sometimes you might have many columns in a dataframe you want to keep and only a relatively few you might want to remove. In these instances, you might want to use the pandas `.drop()` method instead. We can achieve the same result as the example above by simply dropping two variables instead of naming the other four. With this method, we also need to add the specification `axis = 1`, which indicates that it is columns being referenced for being dropped. 

```{python}
narrow_df = df.drop(['lifeExp', 'gdpPercap'], axis=1)
narrow_df.head(2)
```

:::{.callout-tip}
## Reminder on Assignment!

> When you create a variable or dataframe object in python, to the left of the `=` sign you always put the name of the thing you want to make or modify. To the right, that's where you put the contents of what it is you want to create. It may feel counterintuitive! Especially if you are using the same variable or dataframe identifier on both sides of the equals sign.

Reviewer 2: It might be worth a reminder that by assigning to `narrow_df` you are actually overwriting the `narrow_df` that you created in the previous step

Author: Absolutely.

Author: I was going to get into the inplace=False/True but probably better to leave that off.

:::
:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

### Challenge 1
Let's say you just want to narrow down the dataset to include just the country and the GDP per capita. How would you do it? Don't forget to run your code so it also shows a view of the result so you can confirm the code worked as you wanted it to. 

:::
:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

### Solution to Challenge 1

> First you would like to create a new object to hold this narrowed down version of the dataset, then just use the `.head()` to see some of the resulting data. 

Reviewer 2: Teaching note: Should always try to avoid using the word "just" - it makes it seem like the thing you are explaining is intuitive and easy, but for beginners it may very well not be - so this could demotivate them.

```{python}
challenge1_df = df[['country', 'gdpPercap']]
challenge1_df.head(2)
```
:::

## Selecting rows

> Of course, in data analysis we are usually interested in looking at just some of rows of data, not all of it all the time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, in data analysis we are usually interested in looking at just some rows of data, not all of it all the time. 
```

<center>
    <img src="images/exploring-data-structures/select_rows.png" 
    width=700 style="margin:auto"/>
    <p style="text-align: center">
       Selecting Rows
    </p>
    <br/>
</center>

> So when we want to look at just selected rows (i.e. values within a given column) we can specify the column(s) we want to select from, then we use `==` or a different operator as we require:

Reviewer 2: I found this sentence to be a bit confusing - I don't know if this is much better, but we can iterate on it:

```suggestion
So when we want to look at just selected rows (i.e. select rows that have certain values within a given column) we can supply a condition that must be met in that column (for example equal to, less than, etc) and we will get back just the rows that match that condition:
```

>  - not equal to `!=`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - equal to `==`
 - not equal to `!=`
```

 - less than `<`
 - greater than `> `
 - less than or equal to `<=`
 - greater than or equal to `>=`

> Note that we do not use the `=` operator when it comes to specifying values we want to find in a column. This is an important point in python. The `==` operator compares the value or equality of two objects and is the right operator to use. It is a `comparison` operator. In comparison, the `=` is an `assignment` operator. We use it, for example, when we create or assign variables or objects. In the example below we see both at work.

Reviewer 2: Just to avoid using "comparison" in two different contexts side-by-side

```suggestion
Note that we do not use the `=` operator when it comes to specifying values we want to find in a column. This is an important point in python. The `==` operator compares the value or equality of two objects and is the right operator to use. It is a `comparison` operator. In contrast, the `=` is the `assignment` operator. We use it, for example, when we create or assign variables or objects. In the example below we see both at work.
```

> Likely the most common way in python to select rows is to use a condition inside selection brackets `[]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most common way in python to select rows is to use a condition inside selection brackets `[]`
```

```{python}
filtered_df = df[df['year'] == 1972]
filtered_df.head(2)
```

> Let's look at what is happening under the hood.  We see that pandas checks each row to see which rows fulfill the condition specified.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's look at what is happening under the hood.  If we look at the code inside the square brackets, we see that pandas checks each row to see which rows fulfill the condition specified.  
```

```{python}
df['year'] == 1972
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those rows where this check returns `True` are then selected from the data frame.
```

We can also expand this concept by adding additional conditions that narrow or expand the number of rows filtered. Below we use the `&` condition to indicate that both parts of the equation need to be fulfilled. 

When combining multiple conditional statements as in the example below, each condition must be surrounded by parentheses `()` within the square brackets `[]`. You must use the "or" operator `|` and/or the "and" operator `&` for the code to work. 

```{python}
filtered_df = df[(df['year'] == 1972) & (df['country'] == 'Albania')]
filtered_df.head()
```

In the example above, there is only one row of data that matches the condition.

> Or we can use the `|` which indicates that if *either* of the statements are true, then all the rows satisfying either condition are returned.

Reviewer 2: This is a good build-up - nice.

```{python}
filtered_df = df[(df['year'] == 1972) | (df['country'] == 'Albania')]
filtered_df.head()
```

In the example above, there are many rows that satisfy the condition.

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}

## Challenge 2
Your director has come to you and asked if you know what the life expectancy has been in Canada since 1992.  How would you use pandas code to get the data you need? And after having run the code, what's the answer? 
:::
:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}

### Solution to Challenge 2

First you would like to create a new object to hold this narrowed down version of the dataset, then use some method like `.print()` or `.head()` to see some of the resulting data. 

```{python}
challenge2_df = df[(df['year'] >= 1992) & (df['country'] == 'Canada')]
print(challenge2_df)
```
:::

You will find that it is very common within python/pandas to see the `.iloc()` method.

> The `.iloc()` method identifies rows based on their index value (that column to the left of the dataframe when you call the <code>.head()</code> function, for example). It can be used to look at individual rows of data by their original index value.

Reviewer: This explanation of `iloc` is still not quite right. `iloc` doesn't actually refer to the index column at all. I think it makes sense to think of it as there being 2 different ways to index a dataframe:

|  | col 1 | col 2 | col 3 |
| -----  | ----- | ------ | ----- |
| row 1 | | | |
| row 2 | | | |
| row 3 | | | |

VS

|  | 0 | 1 | 2 |
| -----  | ----- | ------ | ----- |
| 0 | | | |
| 1 | | | |
| 2 | | | |

the order of, and names of, rows1-3 and cols1-3 can change, but the second view will always just be 0-2/0-2 no matter how you rearrange and rename the data.

To slice the data using the first view we use `loc`:
df.loc[ row1:row3, col1: col2]

Whereas to slice the data using the second view we use `iloc`:
df.iloc[ 0:-1, 1:2]

Author: Arrrgh! Thanks

Reviewer 2: So just to be contrary - in practice, do you use `.iloc()` much? Indexing by row/column position is pretty fraught (and in my experience rarely used), so I wonder if it's worth teaching...?

Reviewer: I use both loc and iloc depending on the situation - but off the top of my head I can't think of a specific use case of course. I think if I'm doing a random sampling it's often easier to pick out a random subset of integers than it is row names?

Reviewer 2: Yup, that makes sense for sure - maybe an example of that then would be good?

Author: I think I will make rework this so that it just refers to iloc() and give a clean explanation and example of when to use it.

```{python}
df.iloc[251]
```

Or it can be used to call multiple rows in a range:

```{python}
df.iloc[0:5]
```

## Sorting rows

So now you've mastered how to select rows and columns you want, congratulations! Instead of hunting and pecking for insights, one way to quickly make some sense of the data is to sort it - something you probably do in Excel all the time. 

> In the challenge above we created a dataframe "challenge2_df" with just the one country in it and from 1997. So now let's sort the data by year, and then see what can spot any insights. To do this, we use the `.sort_values()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the challenge above we created a dataframe "challenge2_df" with just the one country in it and from 1992. So now let's sort the data by year, and then see if we can spot any insights. To do this, we use the `.sort_values()` method.
```

Let's go fetch and look at the dataframe, and use this method to sort by year, going from more recent to less recent:

```{python}
challenge2_df.sort_values('year', ascending=False)
```

## Putting multiple methods together (chaining)

> You can also put multiple methods in the same line of code, as long as you separate each of the elements. In pandas, this is called "method chaining",  as you are essentially of creating a chain of actions to take place. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also put multiple methods in the same line of code, as long as you separate each of the elements. In pandas, this is called "method chaining",  as you are essentially creating a chain of actions to take place. 
```

In the example below, the chain consists of two links:

1. Select just the rows where the country is equal to Canada AND where the year is 1997 or greater
2. Take these rows and sort them by year, going from high to low values, top to bottom

```{python}
#| scrolled: true
chained_df = df[(df['country'] == 'Canada') & (df['year'] >= 1997)].sort_values('year', ascending = False)
chained_df.head(3)
```

> Another way of chaining is to put each of the functions on multiple lines.  In the example below, each line of code modifies the dataframe to acheive the same result as above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way of chaining is to put each of the functions on multiple lines.  In the example below, each line of code modifies the dataframe to achieve the same result as above.
```

```{python}
chained2_df = df[(df['country'] == 'Canada')]
chained2_df = chained2_df[(chained2_df['year'] >= 1997)]
chained2_df = chained2_df.sort_values('year', ascending=False)
chained2_df.head(3)
```

> This latter approach is very common.  Each respective line to the right of the `=` contains the code that modifies the object assigned to the left of it. Note that you can use a combination of chaining and piping.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This latter approach is very common, as it can be easier to read the code and interpret exactly what is happening. Each respective line to the right of the `=` contains the code that modifies the object assigned to the left of it. Note that you can use a combination of chaining and piping.  
```

You used to have a section that explained chaining but on multiple lines - I would keep this somewhere in the chaining section:
```{python}
chained3_df = df[(df['country'] == 'Canada') & (df['year'] >= 1997])] \
   .sort_values('year', ascending = False)
```

> This latter approach is very common.  Each respective line to the right of the `=` contains the code that modifies the object assigned to the left of it. Note that you can use a combination of chaining and piping.  

Reviewer 2: You mention piping here but I don't see it anywhere else. I think this needs a bit of organizing and nomenclature alignment re chaining vs piping. I think the progression I would use is:

1. Multiple commands on multiple lines, assigning to the same variable on each line (I wouldn't consider this chaining/piping)
2. Joining (chaining) commands with the `.`
3. Above, but with the line continuation `\`

Author: I'll clean up this section

> Each line is executed in sequence, so be careful when constructing code that the order in which you modify your dataframe is right. Take the example below, in which we want to find European values for GDP per capita. In it, we first have a line of code that selects the rows that contain "Europe" in the first line, then looks at the column values for "year", "country", and "gdpPercap".

Reviewer 2: This is good!

Using code to select the country Cambodia, then call `sort_values()` method and chain them together. Looking at the data we see that in the 1970s there was a sharp decline in life expectancy in Cambodia. We also see, thankfully, that it has recovered strongly since then. 

```{python}
challenge3_df = df[(df['country'] == 'Cambodia')].sort_values('year', ascending = False)
print(challenge3_df)
```

:::

## Creating new columns of data

Very often we have some data in our dataset that we want to transform to give us additional information. In Excel this is something that is done all the time by creating a formula in a cell that refers to other columns and applies some sort of logic or mathematical expression to it. 

There are different ways you can go about this in pandas. The most straightforward way is to define a new column on the left of the `=` and then reference the existing column and whatever additional conditions you would like on the right. In the example below, the existing population variable “pop” is converted to a value that shows population in millions.

```{python}
new_cols_df = df
new_cols_df['pop_millions'] = new_cols_df['pop']/1000000
new_cols_df.head(2)
```

> So now we can see which countries had the biggest GDP in 2007. Notice that the GDP data is in scientific notation (i.e. the decimal number times x number of zeros), so it's a bit hard to read. If we wanted readers to consume that data we would go ahead and change the data type for it. But for current purposes we'll leave that alone.

Reviewer: This sentence should probably go underneath the lambda section as that is where you define GDP

> There is a special python function called `lambda`. It is known as an anonymous function, because it is not given a name other than lambda, and can take any number of arguments in an expression.

Reviewer 2: Do you always have to use lambdas inside `assign()` or is there another way to do it? In my experience teaching writing functions at all is a WHOLE THING, then adding anonymous functions on top of that is mind-bending for new learners. If there's a way to avoid it I think we should try

Reviewer 2: And if not, I think we should either:

1. Stick to only lambdas in this case and not mention custom functions at all; OR
2. Have a proper section on writing functions before this - But I think that's probably too much for this course.

The section where we are imagining `myfunc()` will confuse learners - they'll likely try to execute that code, and it is too abstract. If we want to use a function in the lambda (other than `+`), we should choose a real one.

Author: I can redact the myfunc() code out to keep it more straightforward. I am inclined to leave lambda in though, as it is so useful and less complex.

The `.assign()` method looks at this expression with lambda in it and returns the value it is asked to do. This is how it comes all together to give us actual GDP for each row in our dataframe:

```{python}

> new_df = df.assign(gdp=lambda x: x['pop'] * x['gdpPercap'])

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning that gdp isn't in quotes here? That's the one thing that drives me bonkers in R is the ability to sometimes put things in quotes, sometimes not (and never remembering which is supposed to be quoted). I'd say that 95% of the time, things need to be quoted in python (or assigned to a variable first) (with the main exception being when you have created a df and it has added the columns as attributes you can access). This lines up with the functionality here in `assign` (where it is treating the new column as an attribute that doesn't need quoting), but this feels distinctly 'non-pythonic' to me, which in my mind means it's worth mentioning (although it'll probably just confuse people more...)

@ateucher as a more proficient R user where not quoting things that haven't been assigned to variables already is very common - do you have any thoughts?

Reviewer 2: Without going into the R side of things (deep rabbit hole), it is probably worth mentioning here - maybe mention that if you just look inside the `assign()` call, it looks like a regular variable assignment - bare name on the left of the `=`, and the code to create it on the right.

Author: Quotes it is.

Author: I mean quotes it isn't :-)  I can mention this about the quotes and such during the tutorial.  It will likely be cognitive overload but if people come away with an appreciation for the fact that quotes are left out here, and that it might look a bit odd but is in fact ok here.

new_df.head(5)
```

> Python allows us to create our own custom functions which we can use together with lambda.  We won’t create out own function here, but they we can make functions do any number of things, like double a number or convert celcius to fahrenheit, or whatever. Let’s assume that we have created a function and assigned it the name “myfunc”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python allows us to create our own custom functions which we can use together with lambda.  We won’t create our own function here, but we can make functions do any number of things, like double a number or convert Celsius to Fahrenheit, or whatever. We can also use other functions that are pre-built into python, pandas, or any other library. Let’s assume that we have created a function and assigned it the name `myfunc`.
```

Reviewer 2: See above - I think we should probably omit the custom functions and just use a built-in function (`log()` or something)?

Author: I'll delete the custom functions. I'll treat as a bridge too far for this tutorial.

> We could and add it inline with `lambda` together with the `.apply()` function as in this example, which applies the function to a particular column:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could add it inline with `lambda` together with the `.apply()` function as in this example, which applies the function to a particular column:
```

> We could and add it inline with `lambda` together with the `.apply()` function as in this example, which applies the function to a particular column:

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth thinking about the necessity of introducing `apply` in a beginner course. This is now the third way learners will have seen to modify/create a column, and I think that's probably one too many. And then using `apply` to map a function across multiple columns will lose people - there's so much going on in that call.

Author: Ok.

df[‘new_col’] = df[‘old_col’]`.apply`(`lambda` x: `myfunc`(x))

> Finally, the example below would call, not just one column, but *all columns* (i.e. axis=1) in a dataframe to produce the new column result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the example below would call, not just one column, but *all columns* (i.e. axis=1) in a dataframe to produce the new column result. This allows us to make more complicated functions that depend on the relationships between many different columns all at once:
```

But first, let’s get a second file that gives us country size in square kilometers by country. We will use this data to put together with our df dataframe.

```{python}
countrysize_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bcgov/ds-intro-to-python/main/data/countrysize.csv"
countrysize = pd.read_csv(countrysize_url, encoding= 'unicode_escape')
countrysize.info()
countrysize.sample(2)
```

Ok, this `countrysize` dataset looks like we expect - a list of countries alongside the land size of that country in square kilometers. There are some omissions in this list - not all countries in our `df` dataset are present in this `countrysize` object. But for our present purposes this is ok. We just want to get that square kilometers data into a combined dataset and it is sufficient for that.

Essentially what we want to do is a classic "left-join" operation of the sort in the diagram below. Conceptually, the `df` dataset is like the purple table and the `countrysize` dataset is like the red one.

<center>
    <img src="images/exploring-data-structures/join_types.png" 
    width=700 style="margin:auto"/>
    <p style="text-align: center">
       Types of Joins
    </p>
    <br/>
</center>

> The `.merge()` method (https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.merge.html) works similarly to how table joining works in `SQL` or how the `VLOOKUP` function works in Excel. One needs to specify both dataframes, the key variables on which to join them, and the kind of join desired. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `.merge()` method [(with reference material available here)](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.merge.html) works similarly to how table joining works in `SQL` or how the `VLOOKUP` function works in Excel. One needs to specify both dataframes, the key variables on which to join them, and the kind of join desired. 
```

So let's look at the example below to see how it all comes together in code. 

```{python}

> combined_df = df.merge(countrysize, left_on='country', right_on='nation', how='left')

Reviewer 2: ![d0j4xGT](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2816635/200056702-818c6b0e-702d-4c26-9a96-3d118512a565.gif)

Author: Nice!

    <img src="images/exploring-data-structures/concat.png" 
    width=700 style="margin:auto"/>
    <p style="text-align: center">
       Ways to stack data
    </p>
    <br/>
</center>

To illustrate, let’s fetch two simple dataframes. Each contains the average scores for three subjects by year for two separate schools.

```{python}
school1_url  = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bcgov/ds-intro-to-python/main/data/school1.csv"
school2_url  = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bcgov/ds-intro-to-python/main/data/school2.csv"
school1_df = pd.read_csv(school1_url)
school2_df = pd.read_csv(school2_url)
```

Let's take a quick look at the two dataframes.

```{python}
school1_df
```

```{python}
school2_df
```

We call `.concat()` and pass in the objects that we want to stack vertically. This is a similiar operation to `union` in `SQL`.

```{python}
vertical_stack_df = pd.concat([school1_df, school2_df])
vertical_stack_df
```

It is also possible to stack the data horizontally. Here it is necessary to specify the columnar axis (axis=1) as the default setting is for rows (axis=0).

```{python}
horizontal_stack = pd.concat([school1_df, school2_df], axis=1)
horizontal_stack
```

> This introduction only scratches the surface of how to leverage this way of joining datasets together. But it can be a powerful tool in the toolkit for the right use case. More detail found here: https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.concat.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This introduction only scratches the surface of how to leverage this way of joining datasets together. But it can be a powerful tool in the toolkit for the right use case. [More detail found here.](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.concat.html)
```

## Grouping and summarizing

Sometimes of course you would prefer to group rows together for the purpose of summarizing them in various ways.

We can accomplish this using the `.groupby()` method. A `.groupby()` operation involves some combination of splitting the object, applying a function, and combining the results.  It is used together with one or more aggregation functions:

* `count()`: Total number of items
* `first()`, `last()`: First and last item
* `mean()`, `median()`: Mean and median
* `min()`, `max()`: Minimum and maximum
* `std()`, `var()`: Standard deviation and variance
* `mad()`: Mean absolute deviation
* `prod()`: Product of all items
* `sum()`: Sum of all items

> With our data, let's use these tools to get population mean, min and max by continent. Here's how it works. 

Reviewer: I love agg and having it as the core example is perfect, but I would retain at least 1 quick example of doing a quick and dirty aggretation as well (df.groupby(col).other_col.mean()) or something. I use both of these fairly equally I would say.

> First we place "continent" in the `.groupby()` function, then we pass the aggregation functions "mean", "min", and "max" as a dictionary within the `.agg()` function. This dictionary takes the column that we are aggregating - in this case life expectancy - as a key and the aggregation functions as its value.

Reviewer: Should I add in a very brief into to dictionaries in the core-concepts section? I didn't (blame @ateucher !) but I think it's useful, if only for this single line (which is arguably the most important thing they will learn!)

Author: Good idea. For students to be introduced to the pythonic dict concept is a good call I think.

```{python}
grouped_single = df.groupby('continent').agg({'lifeExp': ['mean', 'min', 'max']})

> grouped_single.columns = ['lifeExp_mean', 'lifeExp_min', 'lifeExp_max']

Reviewer: worth explaining why you have to do this column rename? Would it also be worth explaining what `.reset_index()` does after a groupby?

Reviewer 2: Agreed - the two steps here needs some unpacking - worth showing what the df looks like after each step. And (since I recently learned about it), I think `reset_index()` is important - I think getting those grouping variables back as columns is an important step.

Author: Good points both. Will expand.

jupyter: python3
---

> Exploring and Understanding Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Exploring and Understanding Data
```

    <br/>
</center>

First things first. If we want to look the contents of a single column, we could do it like this, specifying the column name after the `.` without parentheses:

```{python}
country_metrics.country
```

> When we want to select more than one column to include in our dataframe, we use the convention df[['col1', 'col2']] to select the columns we want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we want to select more than one column to include in our dataframe, we use the convention `df[['col1', 'col2']]` to select the columns we want.
```

Putting code in code backticks.

> In our example below, we will create a new dataframe called "narrow_country_metrics".We primarily interested in getting the population metric from the original dataset, and since we want to be able to analyze it by year, country, and continent, we will add those into our new dataframe also. So the dataset will be more narrow than the one it was created from. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our example below, we will create a new dataframe called "narrow_country_metrics". We are primarily interested in getting the population metric from the original dataset, and since we want to be able to analyze it by year, country, and continent, we will add those into our new dataframe also. So the dataset will be more narrow than the one it was created from. 
```

 - less than or equal to `<=`
 - greater than or equal to `>=`

Note that we do not use the `=` operator when it comes to specifying values we want to find in a column. This is an important point in python. The `==` operator compares the value or equality of two objects and is the right operator to use. It is a `comparison` operator. In contrast, the `=` is the `assignment` operator. We use it, for example, when we create or assign variables or objects. In the example below we see both at work.

The most common way in python to select rows is to use a condition inside selection brackets `[]`

```{python}
filtered_country_metrics = country_metrics[country_metrics['year'] == 1972]
filtered_country_metrics.head(2)
```

Let's look at what is happening under the hood.  If we look at the code inside the square brackets, we see that pandas checks each row to see which rows fulfill the condition specified.  

```{python}
country_metrics['year'] == 1972
```

Those rows where this check returns `True` are then selected from the data frame.

> We can also expand this concept by adding additional conditions that narrow or expand the number of rows filtered. Below we use the `&` condition to indicate that both parts of the equation need to be fulfilled. 

Reviewer: Make sure to add in the callback to the &|~ vs and/or/not section so that the connection is made. I would probably just put it in a .callout-tip box.

Author: I've added more clarification around difference between pandas and python logical operators.

When combining multiple conditional statements as in the example below, each condition must be surrounded by parentheses `()` within the square brackets `[]`. You must use the "or" operator `|` and/or the "and" operator `&` for the code to work. 

```{python}

> filtered_country_metrics = country_metrics[(df['year'] == 1972) & (country_metrics['country'] == 'Albania')]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filtered_country_metrics = country_metrics[(country_metrics['year'] == 1972) & (country_metrics['country'] == 'Albania')]
```

df was not renamed to country_metrics here - quarto book would not preview.

print(challenge2_df)
```
:::

You will find that it is very common within python/pandas to see the `.iloc()` function used, so it is worthwhile to give that a brief introduction also.

This function enables the selection of data from a particular row or column, according to the integer based index as shown in the image below:

<center>
    <img src="images/exploring-data-structures/pandasdf.png" 
    width=300 style="margin:auto"/>
    <p style="text-align: center">
      Row and column values iloc() refers to
    </p>
    <br/>
</center>

By referring to these locations, we can use `iloc()` to retrieve the exact cells we want to see. For example, if we just want the row of data corresponding to the index integer value 5, we would run the following code:

```{python}
country_metrics.iloc[5]
```

We can also modify the above call to look at column(s)! For example, we specify the row(s) of interest to the left of a `comma` in the square brackets, and the column(s) of interest to the right of it.  In the example below, the code will retrieve just the content found at the intersection of row 5 and column 3:

```{python}
country_metrics.iloc[5,3]
```

> We can also retrieve *ranges* of rows and columns respectively by employing a `colon` along with the starting and ending rows or columns we want. In the example below, we want to get rows "0" through "2" and  the columns "0" through "3": 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also retrieve *ranges* of rows and columns respectively by employing a `colon` along with the starting and ending rows or columns we want. This is the same *slicing* methodology we used when looking at lists. In the example below, we want to get rows "0" through "2" and  the columns "0" through "3": 
```

A common approach is to put the object name on each sucessive line of code along with the `=` operator as well as the modifying code to the right.  Imagine we were give the following task:

1. Select just the rows where the country is equal to Canada AND where the year is 1997 or greater
2. Take these rows and sort them by year, going from high to low values, top to bottom

The example below shows how we would employ the line-by-line approach:

```{python}
chained2_df = country_metrics[(country_metrics['country'] == 'Canada')]
chained2_df = chained2_df[(chained2_df['year'] >= 1997)]
chained2_df = chained2_df.sort_values('year', ascending=False)
chained2_df.head(3)
```

You can read fairly clearly what is happening in each line. 

You can also put multiple methods in the same line of code, as long as you separate each of the elements. In pandas, this is sometimes referred to as joining or chaining, as you are essentially creating a joining/chaining actions together.

> The code below accomplishes what the more verbose code above does but in a more efficient way:

Reviewer: I would add the third example that follows pep8 (using \ to span multiple lines so that the line isn't 80+chars)

```{python}
#| scrolled: true

> chained_df = country_metrics[(country_metrics['country'] == 'Canada') &     (country_metrics['year'] >= 1997)].sort_values('year', ascending = False)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
chained_df = country_metrics[(country_metrics['country'] == 'Canada') &  (country_metrics['year'] >= 1997)].sort_values('year', ascending = False)
```

> But first, let’s get a second file that gives us country size in square kilometers by country. We will use this data to put together with our df dataframe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But first, let’s get a second file that gives us country size in square kilometers by country. We will use this data to put together with our `country_metrics` dataframe.
```

So let's look at the example below to see how it all comes together in code. 

```{python}

> combined_df = country_metrics.merge(country_size, left_on='country', right_on='nation', how='left')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
combined_df = country_metrics.merge(
    country_size, 
    left_on='country', 
    right_on='nation', 
    how='left'
    )
```

>80 chars

Reviewer: I can't leave a comment on this anymore but also a few lines below where you have combined_df = combined_df.drop('nation', axis=1) should be in a code block.

new_cols_df['pop_millions'] = new_cols_df['pop']/1000000
new_cols_df.head(2)
```
<br>

> Another way is to call the pandas function `apply()` in which other functions can be passed for a given column. In the example below, the `len()` function is applied to each row in the "country" column and a new column with the number of characters for that row is returned:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way is to call the pandas function `apply()` in which other, more complicated functions can be passed for a given column. This could be a complicated mathematical formula, a function acting on strings or dates, or any other function that cannot be represented by a simple multiplication or division. In the example below, the `len()` function is applied to each row in the "country" column and a new column with the number of characters for that row is returned:
```

Adding more context for why apply is needed.

```{python}
simple_mean = country_metrics.groupby('continent').lifeExp.mean()
simple_mean.head(10)
```

Fortunately, if we want to look at more aggregations at once, we can do that too. To extend our example above, we would put "continent" in the `.groupby()` function, then pass additional aggregation functions (in our case, we will add  "mean", "min", and "max") as a dictionary within the `.agg()` function. This dictionary takes the column that we are aggregating - in this case life expectancy - as a key and the aggregation functions as its value.

```{python}
grouped_single = country_metrics.groupby('continent').agg({'lifeExp': ['mean', 'min', 'max']})
grouped_single.columns = ['lifeExp_mean', 'lifeExp_min', 'lifeExp_max']
grouped_single.head(5)
```

We can nest additional "groups within groups" by creating a list of column names and passing that to the `.groupby()` function instead of passing a single string value.  The example below adds more granularity with the introduction of 'country' and the creation of a list to hold both 'continent' and 'country'.  

```{python}
grouped_multiple = country_metrics.groupby(['continent', 'country']).agg({'pop': ['mean', 'min', 'max']})

> grouped_multiple.columns = ['pop_mean', 'pop_min', 'pop_max']

Reviewer: This line needs an explanation I think -> otherwise they will forget to do it and end up with multi-indexed rows and columns which is way more confusing to work with (same way that `.reset_index()` needs an explanation)

Author: I did more detail on reset_index() above in the section where i looked at sorting

Reviewer: The line where you change the column names is what needs explaining as well.

Author: Good call, added some explanation for the column naming

Reviewer 2: @swayneh do you mean the addition on line 527? "We also add a line of code that gives each of the columns a new name with the `.columns()` function." I think it might be worth saying it again here.

@ateucher all four usages - references and use of .columns() in code -  appear between lines 526 and 559, so pretty tightly so people should not forget what it does hopefully in that duration

@swayneh fair enough. I think it's worth thinking about what you'll say out loud as you walk through it with the learners, and I know for myself I would be mentioning what it's doing each time I use it.

Using what we learned about how to select rows, we should limit the dataframe to rows where the year is greater than or equal to 1997. Next we should create a multicolumn call to the `.groupby()` function. Finally we should select some aggregations such as mean, min, and max among others could make sense here.

```{python}

> df_current = country_metrics[country_metrics['year'] >= 1997]

Reviewer: For this challenge, I would make it that they need to summarize both life expectancy AND population for a variety of statistics. Getting stats for 2 columns isn't covered in the above text, but is straightforward enough based on what they've seen that they should be able to do it here. And we can walk through the example if enough people aren't getting it.

Author: Good idea. Restructured the challenge thusly

simple_mean
```

Fortunately, if we want to look at several aggregations at once, we can do that too. To extend our example above, we would specify the "continent" column in the `.groupby()` function, then pass additional aggregation functions (in our case, we will add  "mean", "min", and "max") as a dictionary within the `.agg()` function. 

:::{.callout-tip}

> ## What is a Dictionary in Python?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Recall: Dictionaries in Python
```

These have been introduced already so it doesn't need a full explanation

> A dictionary in Python language is a particular type of data structure that contains a collection of what are called key:value pairs. It is analagous to a regular word dictionary you are familiar with which is a collection of words to their meanings.  Python dictionaries allow us to associate a value to a unique key, and then to quickly access this value.  They are generally created within curly braces `{}` and have a specified key name and value (e.g. basic form for a python dictionary `{"key1": "value1"}`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that a dictionary in Python language is a particular type of data structure that contains a collection of `key`: `value` pairs. It is analogous to a regular word dictionary you are familiar with which is a collection of words to their meanings.  Python dictionaries allow us to associate a value to a unique key, and then to quickly access this value.  They are generally created within curly braces `{}` and have a specified key name and value (e.g. basic form for a python dictionary `{"key1": "value1"}`)
```

:::

<br>

> This dictionary takes the column that we are aggregating - in this case life expectancy - as a key and the aggregation functions as its value. We also add a line of code that gives each of the columns a new name with the `.columns()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This dictionary takes the column that we are aggregating - in this case life expectancy - as a key and a **list** of aggregation functions as its value. We also add a line of code that gives each of the columns a new name with the `.columns()` function.
```
